imminent experiences in class yet of
when mind and body and heart and spirit
come together um and I I on a personal
level feel really lucky and happy that
he's with us this week
um I only know a little bit about your
history of your life's work so I'll just
let you speak that okay and this is ch
[Applause]
come on people let it
[Music]
rip feel how that changed the energy
just a little bit
I don't have time to [__] around
anymore we don't have time to [__]
around anymore there's just not time
it's just only time to get down to the
serious stuff so let's get down to
it rick asked me to talk about teaching
like I've picked up some incalculable
secret Knowledge from teaching in Ohio
for 30 years I don't know so I'll just
tell you what I got
and then you can decide whether it was a
good thing but uh we're going to have
fun tonight no matter what and you know
I don't think you wouldn't mind if we
kind of finish before 10:00 would you
it's been a long day you people have
been working hard and for me a talk is
simply an excuse to get to the
discussion right CU that's where the
juice is that's really where the where
the good stuff is so I'm just going to
kind of lay out some
bullets throw out some material to sort
of focus our discussion but I'm really
hoping we can move quickly enough into
some discussion and if that goes really
well we'll still be out of here before
10:00 all right up yeah
okay is Robert here yet he's coming he's
coming there he
is finally among his many
illustrious Publications he did he one
of the ones that you may not come across
too often is his beautiful introduction
his prologue preface to the living
classroom which is a great honor and uh
he he really made me look pretty good uh
very good it was just honor so this is
kind of PCC certified you know and how
many people have read
this okay all right well I'm going to
hit some bullet points on it but I'm
going to put it in a larger context I'm
I'm going to give you some of the
backstory to it all right and I'm just
going to talk a little bit about how I
came to write this and uh kind of what
happened during it and what's it about
but this is like my second Saturn return
book I mean I started teaching in 79 and
this was published in
2008 that's pretty much exactly 29 years
and before I was coming up on sabatical
because the only time I can this is a
little loud doesn't it sound a little
loud maybe no okay all right right the
only time I can write books is when I'm
on sabatical I can write essays before
but takes a lot of time to get in deep
so before I came up on my last sabatical
there were two books that I was thinking
about a book on psychedelics and the
living classroom and so I went into
session space what I usually do when I
have an important question and after I
was done with the various things I said
what should I write and it said
definitely the living classroom Because
by the time you write the Psychedelic
book you're going to be so far out on
left field that you know you're going to
be beyond the mainstream pale and uh now
where you are the living classroom you
can do it in a mainstream fashion so I
said okay and as soon as I said okay and
soon as that I agreed to that and and
kind of made the mental intention all
sorts of wonderful things began to
happen I got some grant money that
allowed me to spend more time writing
the book and just a lot of wonderful
things happened
and the living classroom has been
published or there have been six
excerpts or excerpts or chapters that
have been published in five different
anthologies it's gotten more AirPlay
than any other single thing that I've
written and I think it's because of
Robert mcdermitt's
preface no I think it's because
Consciousness Collective fields of
Consciousness is an idea that kind of
it's bubbling up it's it's time has come
we're ripe for it
and so as the second Saturn
return uh this is a book that the
Universe wanted to be written and uh
it's basically a summation of the most
important things I learned about
teaching from my 30 years of teaching uh
at
Youngstown now another little background
when I had my second Saturn return and I
came to Youngstown it broke my heart I
really didn't want to he here I mean
didn't go to seven years of graduate
school in order to teach in an an open
enrollment undergraduate college about
12, 13,000 students in a in a Rust Belt
town in Ohio no graduate students it
wasn't my ideal and I tried like anyone
with a grain of sense tried desperately
to leave for several years because you
know when you get out of graduate school
and you come to a good graduate school
you have a few years when you might jump
out into something and I tried jumping
problem was I had also encountered
Stan's work and I started my own
psychedelic work in 79 a year after I
started teaching my mind got very
quickly
radicalized I mean one year I was
writing essays on towards a unified
theory of metaphor two years later I'm
writing essays on the emergence of
perinatal symptoms in Buddhist
meditations like what happened you know
my department was wondering what the
hell happened to him they hired a
traditional analytic philosopher of
religion and linguistic discourse and
suddenly I'm really saying hey this
guy's on to something seriously good
well it wasn't happening you know I
religious studies is a very conservative
discipline and by the way did you
appreciate our dress up for you this is
just for you yeah
okay it wasn't happening and so that
this came to a head four years after I
was there four years and there was a the
only job that it had opened in 5 years
open that year and they decided to go
with the very traditional philosophical
theological type and I thought ah
[__] and you know when you teach in a at
a teaching University where you're
really in the classroom a lot you're
teaching three courses a quarter nine
courses a year plus teaching in the
summer this just pounding difficult
teaching and I just said okay okay I
give up this is not what I
wanted but it seems to be what life
wants so I surrendered and I said I'm
going to become the best teacher I can
possibly become I'm not going to fight
it I want to work with it let's see what
happens let's see where it
goes and it went in some very
interesting places and the result of
what happened basically I was able to
put down in this book and onethird of
this book is my students one third of it
at the back third of it really it's a
second book are essays that my students
have written over the years and just
beautiful beautiful
essays and there were hidden reasons I
learned later for what I was in
Youngstown and I'll get to those in a
bit and there were some benefits of
being there because if you don't have a
lot of graduate students and you don't
have a lot of responsibility for that
level you can do a lot of exploration
you can do a lot of things so if I ever
wanted to learn something I just said
I'll teach a seminar on it
and I was teaching a lot of courses and
things that lay outside my discipline
and I just kind of learned I learned a
lot of things and as I went through and
I was able to do a lot of innovation in
the uh in our curriculum I taught a lot
of what I call transpersonal studies you
know near-death episode research
reincarnation research out of- Body
Research I taught transpersonal
psychology of religion I taught lots of
seminars and Stan gr's work so you know
there's a certain there were some
benefits there were some tradeoffs and
one of the great benefits was
non-traditionally aged students about
40% of our students are
non-traditionally aged and that was a
nice compensation for not having
graduate students because they were you
know they were much more seriously
engaging in their studies than the 18 19
year old kind of might
be but the other thing that Youngstown
gave me was an opportunity for deep
spiritual
practice here something you know there's
not much to do in Ohio it's kind of
boring you know and you know watch the
corn
and watch the corn you know so it's just
kind of a nice contemplative smooth
environment if you want to do deep
serious work and so I wanted I found out
I wanted to do deep serious work so I
started my psychedelic work right when I
started my career and I did four intense
years and then I stopped for six years
and then I did another and 10 years
after
that now I love teaching I've always
loved teaching I've always liked to gab
but I tell you teaching open enrollment
University it's Frontline teaching I
mean this the kids who didn't this first
time they anyone in their family's gone
to college a lot of people pulling them
down telling why do you want to go to
college for you know just get a job at
GM Lordstown make cars you
know it's what I you have to do what I
call full contact teaching this is take
no prisoners full contact teaching you
have to provide the mo motivation you
have to kick him in the butt you have to
slap them around it is
like when I come here to teach man you
guys are so easy you're so motivated
you're already you know it's like you
want to learn these things you're
there in Ohio it's a it's a different
game and so they make you work for it
and I work for it I'm willing to work
for it and eventually my classroom
became I began to think of it like a
dojo
you know it's like you're on my
mat no one's going to get hurt but
you're going to hit the floor a few
times and it's
like I don't have time to [__]
around you know let's get down to it so
30% of my students who sign up the first
day they drop out by the end of the
first week and I make it real clear just
to get credits in the humanities is a
perfectly good reason to be here the
first day it's not a good reason to be
here the second day cuz it's easier play
ways to get the credit but I also then
try to show them what we can do show
them a sense of where we can go if
you're willing to work and I find that
they're willing to work if you give them
a quality product they're willing to
work with you because they're they
really they've been damaged often in
their High School they've been hurt
they've been crimped they don't have
high expectations they you know they're
not at Oberlin they're not at Yale they
have kind of low expectations if you
give them the promise of something
substantive they'll work their ass off
for you and they'll open their heart if
you allow them to and go
there but when you start to psychedelics
and you make the choice to work with
psychedelics you kind of have to make
some adjustments in your professional
life I had to split my life in two I had
a professional life where I did the
things that you do as a professor and
you do all the traditional things you
serve in the committees and you do this
and you do that and you publish and then
I had my personal life where I was doing
the graian Deep psychotherapeutic work
and you can't let those two blend in the
classroom this is not CIS right the good
people of Ohio do not like to hear that
their professors are dropping massive
quantities of
acid so you keep those two separate so I
didn't talk about my work in front of my
to my classes
I mean my own faculty members it was
like 10 years before they really got a
an idea of what was going on I mean
every when I would do a session I was
kind of so poor as a beginning faculty
member I had to borrow the tape player
from one of my colleagues he began to
get a sense of what was going on but you
don't talk about it you just I didn't
talk about it for
years because these were kept separate
in the physical
world it ended up producing some very
interesting complications or
Consequences that taught me a great deal
about the nature of Consciousness
because as we're going to see
Consciousness did not split itself even
though I split my world the world of
mind is not dividable in that way and
there were some things that happened
that began to make those things be
connected but there were also some
personal consequences I'll come back
around later about when you split
yourself like this and you own you you
cannot be your whole and complete self
in every circumstance and you kind of
know what you're doing going
in but I didn't really understand what
the some of the long-term ramifications
of that would be down the
way so this is what began to
happen early in my
teaching student asked me a
question you know after you've taught a
course 3 or four years is you pretty
much have heard most of the questions
that undergraduates are going to ask so
soon as I ask a question your mind
starts running with an
answer this time I just
stopped and I thought among all the
possible answers that I could give which
what could I say that would be most in
tune to this
student and my mind kind of stopped
and suddenly I had an image of a door in
the back of my mind and a piece of paper
passed through it and I read the piece
of paper and it was an
idea it was an idea an answer that i'
never given to that particular question
so I just okay let's try this I ran with
it and it h the magic happened teaching
happened uh the students eyes lit up
other people's eyes lit up the energy
went up in the room
something good happened so I thought
okay I and I really prepare I mean I
bring it look I even brought notes to
eln I prepare my classes I have a lot of
notes I really work them through and I
keep on track with my syllabus I know
where I'm going to be in the 12th week
in a course you know cuz I otherwise you
anyway I really prepare for it but that
little door in the back of my mind gave
me a a teaching about integrating
improvisational intuition
with data with my prepared work so I
began to pay attention to that door in
the back of my mind and to work with it
and when I did you know something
happened in the room that didn't happen
when I just kind of stayed in my
prepared
script and
then time passed I kept on doing my
psychedelic work and if you've read
those of you who read dark night early
Dawn you kind of know it you know I
dropped into some pretty pretty deep
stuff pretty quickly and really was
engaging deep
deep uh Collective Dynamics and and
entering Hill Realms and the ocean of
suffering I talk about and so it was
pretty intense but wherever I was on
Saturday Monday morning I was back in
the classroom doing my job and it was
really that was a commitment I would not
let my personal work get in the way of
my professional work I had a major
commitment for my students
and then one day when it was just an
ordinary day I've been doing my ordinary
thing teaching intro Eastern intra World
teaching psychology religion or
transpersonal studies this was actually
an intro Eastern
course a student came up after class
after he was sure that the room was
empty and no one would hear what he had
to
say and he said it's funny that you
would use that example that you used in
class today cuz that's exactly what
happened to me this
week and he told me a story and it was
right it's like I had quoted his life
story so that's interesting you know
okay a little synchronistic you know but
I never thought of myself as being
psychically sensitive I always sort of
think of myself as being kind of
brickish in that way I'm a psychic brick
I don't have those type of things some
people do I always en Envy those people
who have like I was 12 years old when I
had my first mystical experience I said
oh lucky you but it's not
me so I kind of you know I was trained
to brush this stuff
off but then a few weeks later it
happened again somebody came up and said
you know that's exactly what happened to
my
mother and to make a long story short
the deeper my psychedelic work
progressed the more frequently this
began to
happen people were finding pieces of
their personal life showing up in my
lectures and I wasn't intending it and I
wasn't conscious of doing it I would
just be reaching for an example to
illustrate a
point and something was connecting me to
them and I was like reaching into their
life and putting it
forward now if you're in a room just
looking for three credits or four
credits in the humanities and you're in
the back of the room with your baseball
cap on backwards and you're just kind of
in time when all of a sudden the
professor is using your life to
illustrate a point being made how could
you not take that as a personal
invitation how could you not have
yourself snapped to
attention this began to happen not a lot
but often enough that it kind of became
a pretty semi-regular thing in my
classroom and then the plot deepened
when I began to go into deeper and
deeper
territory when I got into the deep ocean
of suffering death rebirth at the
collective level where you're just
dealing with massive currents it's like
you're not dealing with the Nearshore
currents you're dealing with the big
tidal flows in the collective psyche and
you're getting into deep deep Collective
death rebirth
meltdowns I found that my students were
being drawn deeper and deeper into deep
existential crisis in their own lives it
was like we we were all part of one
giant massive coex meltdown
system addictions were bottoming
out bad marriages or weak marriages were
being forced into you know grow or die
situations uh people were having
suddenly
unearthing uh sexual abuse and I don't
talk about sexual abuse but something
was bringing to the
surface deep pains in their
life I can't emphasize enough that this
was not my intention in fact as this
thing began to happen I began to even
try to slow it down because it did not
feel like I didn't understand it so I
couldn't control it it was happening he
like how do you ensure informed consent
in a process which is so
involuntary I even put on my syllabus
one time I put uh caution taking this
course may be dangerous to your
psychological
equilibrium the students thought I was
being
cute this thing I called it the magic I
you know the magic
happened uh I'd come home and I'd say to
my wife the magic happened today you
know I was just doing my stuff and Bam
all of a sudden this lightning bolt came
out of nowhere and blasted somebody
apart and all of a sudden we're having
this intense conversation after class
and they're like they're moving
something's moving in their life I I I
began to sort of function like a
lightning rod you know there was
something Spark
working and at that time I didn't
understand really what was going on I
knew it had something to do with my
psychedelic work but I really wasn't
prepared for the enormity of the
implications of the paradigm shift that
I was going to have to make and
eventually did make to understand how
this
happened and by the way uh everything
that's in the living classroom I mean I
had been thinking about it and wrestling
with it some but it all dropped in
intact complete in one psychedelic
session all the fundamental structure
and it what it's what gave me seeing it
clearly in that space is what gave me
the courage of my convictions to
articulate it so that it because if it's
happening to me I knew it had to be
happening to other people and it's not
really about
psychedelics if I were using any type of
spiritual practice that had the capacity
or any that to drop you deep into the
collective psyche and into that
territory if you open up at that level
then you're naturally going to generate
a kind of a an energetic shock wave
which is going to touch the lives of
people that you have karmic connection
to and I'm a teacher so I have a lot of
karmic connections to my
students this is does if you're a
business person if you're a researcher
if you're a chore
phographer if you're working in the
world and you're embedded in a network
of relationships and you go deep into
that level see the mind the universe
doesn't necessarily from one perspective
it doesn't recognize
individuals it's like the weather it
doesn't really recognize individual
atoms or molecules of you know oxygen
and whatnot it's
like there's that side of it going it
just goes so
I began to realize that I was teaching
on two levels at campus there was
something began to happen at one level
and for the most of the students I was
just an ordinary Professor I was
teaching the stuff and they came and our
relationship was about information
exchange and they mostly left pretty
happy but there was a second group of
students who began to take pretty much
all the courses I would teach and they
were here because just being in my
classes began to be a source of
transformation in their lives they were
here for the energy or something they
knew that something was positively
moving in their life when we came
together to work and again it wasn't my
intention eventually I this I began to
realize that there is an energetic
resonance this is just it's nothing
Supernatural or paranormal it's just
normal it's just natural life is like
that Consciousness is like that minds
are like that we it's just an illusion
of the physical senses that our minds
are fundamentally separate well they are
but there's that other side where the
you know individual Minds emerge out of
a unified field of mind and when you
come together and you focus
intention there is a natural sharing
that takes place and if one of you is
working at a very deep level then the
universe seizes that opportunity to
awaken and to heal other
beings it's not something I was doing it
was something that the Universe was
doing almost in spite of me you know
okay
teaching is information transfer and all
that magic that you do you know in the
dance of the dance but underneath that
teaching involves the direct engagement
of
mind and mind in the unified field of
Mind clarified States Of Consciousness
are
contagious you cannot help it it cannot
help it it just happen negative states
are also
contagious but clarified states of
consciousness are
contagious our spiritual ecology simply
does not allow private
realization if you're beginning to wake
up there's an energetic quality
component of waking up people around you
begin to wake up and if you're a teacher
or you're in anything that works people
where you're working with groups you
have to be prepared for that consequence
for that implication in fact you cannot
stop it there may be a reason why people
do this work in monasteries on mountains
far away because it kind of buffers you
know but if you're going to do this work
in the world you have to be prepared to
handle the implications or the
consequences of this natural
process and here's the thing by the way
the better teacher you
are the more powerful this will this
will
happen you know because teaching is that
Magical Mystery you know it's that
resonance I mean you're really you're
working communication you're trying to
organize intention you're in the dance
and if you're good at that well then
that just makes it easier for this stuff
to
happen So eventually I had no recourse
but I I had to learn what was happening
I had to understand what it means to
teach at this level what time is it oh
okay wow okay
what does it mean to teach when your
person has kind of become the add some
kind of added Catalyst into the room
it's not just the ideas that are the
Catalyst but your person has become the
Catalyst I had to learn how to
manage not control but to manage the
energies that were involved how to make
it more efficient how to protect the
students how to how to just how to
choreograph how to choreograph it a
little
bit and I began to realize it wasn't
just what was happening in the room was
really too big to be understood simply
in terms of an energetic resonance
between my spiritual practice and my
students that was part of what was going
on but then I began to realize there was
something else going on students were
beginning to show up in each other's
dreams there was something happening
socially in the room
what what was happening was simply I
began to understand what it was too big
and too powerful simply to be
explainable in terms of some just a a
one-on-one resonance between me and them
there was a second Dynamic that was
moving on moving in the room now I had
read Rupert sheldrake you know his books
uh a new science of life and the
presence of the past and The Rebirth of
nature ID read his books I understood
the concept of morphogenetic resonance
and morphic FS but rert is working in
very very big fields long you know
historical evolutionary fields and I
didn't see the relevance of those giant
feels to what was happening in my
classroom because we were together for
15 weeks at a time that's not a whole
lot of
time but then
I again in this one particular
psychedelic session suddenly I saw Oh
you mean short-term groups have generate
feels feels are generated whenever
people gather together and the more
focused they are in intention and if
they're together long enough and deeply
engaged enough and this very important
if the if the group is repeated if it's
a repetition that goes on these fields
emerge
now they emerge out of the unified
nature of con ious that Consciousness is
a inherently unified field so it's not
like an Erector Set where you're
connecting you're putting two pieces
that are really separate linking them
together it's kind of like that but but
at a deeper level what's happening is an
underlying potential is being is being
brought is being sparked into
form group feels group
mind Phil Jackson not a very mystical
guy as far as I know but coach of the
Los Angeles Lakers right he sees it he
says we see this a lot in critical
situations when players are totally
focused on the team goal their effort
can create chain reactions it's as if
they become totally connected to one
another in sync with one another like
five fingers on one hand right now
Howard Bloom great author wonderful book
the global brain
he wrote In other words without knowing
it individuals form a
team Even in our most casual moments we
pulse in
synchrony isn't that a wonderful phrase
We pulse in
synchrony other symptoms of this being a
field phenomenon I began to realize that
uh there was just like rert sheldrake's
theory predicts there was a change in
the learning curve taking place in my
classes it's kind of like it this is too
simple but it's almost as if one class
was starting where the last class
stopped is it wasn't quite like that but
you know you got a a a a course scripted
you have it kind of worked out you know
it's a winner you've refined it you've
spent several years polishing it you
know you're taking them A to B to C to D
you walk in the class the first day and
all of a sudden they're giving you acces
that they're already in B they're
already in C and you've got to rearrange
your entire syllabus or you've got to
make an you've got to step up because
something has shifted they've moved I
began to realize there was a learning
that was taking place in one class
between
semesters there was some kind of
Developmental process and you you go
through certain turning points all of a
sudden things are stable and then
something triggers and every class in
that subject after that you're working
in a different context and that's a pain
in the ass to have to rearrange your
syllabus so once in a while it's like
I'm not going to do that I'm going we're
going to stay with the tried and
true all that's bad news that's doesn't
work because yeah the students get bored
and the energy in the room and then you
spend so much time trying to lift up the
energy and it's like no it's better to
go with it find where they are because
if you find them it's not that you'll do
a better job teaching but there's
there's something that they're giving
you in where they are they're going to
take you places that you haven't been
before
yourself I began to differentiate two
different levels of these fields so
there's the class field I call and then
the course field the class field is
created by the energy of the people who
are in the room
today all right it's kind of like in a a
tree if there many many rings of a tree
the uh the outer ring the what is the
not the cambium ring what's the outer
ring of the of the tree called I'm I'm
blanking on it sorry having a brain fart
you know the living outer edge of the
tree not the bark right underneath the
bark pardon vascular cambi cambium okay
that's the class field all
right the course field is a much older
bigger field it's the energy it's a kind
of a residual Arc in the learning of the
field which has been contributed to by
every student who has ever taken this
course with this particular
Professor now I'm going to kind of
restrict it to that with this particular
Professor I think it's more than that
but in the beginning the class field may
be the stronger field
but over time when the course field when
you've been teaching 20 30 more years
the course field gets very strong so
here you've got three systems the
individual student whose Consciousness
is being affected by the class field
whose Consciousness is being affected by
the course
field so here You' got the universal
mind the
individual and what we're suggesting is
that this organic relationship ship
between universal mind and individual
mind has these intermediate feels which
when those feels are get strong and when
they are skillfully focused as you can
then it triggers it animates it empowers
it makes more creative more
adventuresome the learning of the
individual mind if you were coach we'd
be talking about performance Fields if
we were Physicians we'd be talking about
healing fields
I'm a teacher so we're talking about
learning feels but feels is feels okay
old feels young feels present feels past
feels I learned that you could work with
these fields I learned some
tricks uh I start working with the feels
of a class before the class
begins there are certain practices that
I do because to me the field is the
unregister student in the
room right they it's a tangible thing I
even will so far go so far as when I'm
looking at which books to assign a
semester from now I sometimes try to
tune into the feel that's emerging
around this course to determine whether
I should use go to a or go with
b i
do certain kinds of practices spiritual
practices because I I don't want a lot
of old Karma screwing things up in the
classroom I don't want a lot of
bad vibe from you mean because you know
I'm a reincarnationist I believe in
reincarnation you we I think you
know life being what it is I'm assuming
I've got former lives with some of my
students I'm assuming that sometimes it
worked out well and we got something
good that came out of it sometimes maybe
it didn't work out too well we got some
bruises or some pain that's going to
come up
we I don't have any time for the bad
stuff so I do these practices it's like
I'm sorry if I hurt you without the
students knowing this is something you
don't do to them I'm sorry if I hurt you
please forgive me if you hurt me I
forgive you let's just go let's just get
on with it and there are practices you
can do every spiritual tradition has
practices for cutting the cords of karma
karma I used to use a Hawaiian
Kahuna practice calledo which means
cutting and then later when I learn CH
which is a Tibetan practice which also
means cutting I would do that
practice so before class
begins when I get a roster which usually
comes in about a month before the class
begins I'm doing chud with this roster
with the students in front of
me I've often wondered what my faculty
colleagues would think if they came in
and I'm doing a bell and ringing
a and I'm singing a Tibetan prayer for
students in a class that hasn't even
begun
yet but once you understand feels this
is simply just being efficient it's just
being efficient you're working with the
energy before there are physical beings
present once the class begins then you
get to see the beings that are
physically the embodiment of the energy
that you've been picking up on and you
can work with feels during the
class you can do it behind the scenes
and there ways in which you can do it in
the class visualization exercises can
Empower Fields various types of Cafe
conversations can cross fertilize
Fields one of the other things that's
important to do is to close the field at
the end of the
semester now
by closing the field I don't mean like
you dissolve the field but there's a
sense in which every class has a
beginning a middle and an
end it's important if you're going to
empower Fields And if you're going to
work with fields and you're you're going
to invite that type of dynamic into the
room it's important at the end of the
semester to close the field and help
students detach from the field to
re-empower them as individual Learners
and then send them on their way where
they will now go on to new fields and
connect with new groups and then go on
to new fields and connect to new you
don't want to encourage a an attachment
to the field but if you don't close the
field sometimes students get stuck
they'll show up at your office two weeks
after course is over kind of wanting to
talk and what's I began to realized
there was something wrong here it wasn't
just that they liked the course but they
were still psychically attached to to
the energy of the class but they didn't
have a place to take it and so you have
to do things both shamanic and
strategically pedagogically to close the
field so that like a final exam is a
good way to help close the field let
them demonstrate their
learning whenever you have a kind of a a
beer or a pizza at the local uh Student
Union at the end of a course you're
always are asking what's what are you
going to do next where are you going
next what's next on the agenda you're
you're focusing you collect information
on the course you get student feedback
in the course and you tell them I'm
going to use your feedback to make this
better for the next class you're
reinforcing the sense that they are part
of a a lineage of learning and their
time is
over and that's okay everybody our time
together is fin night
waking up in the
classroom waking up right we're talking
about you
know some type of Spiritual Awakening
what do we mean what is
that waking up simply is in in one
perspective it's simply waking up to the
simple fact that nobody holds their own
being in and of itself the beginnings
and ending of our being lie outside of
ourselves there's just there is no it's
it's waking up to the tangible fact that
uh we our lives are deeply intertwined
and woven together and if you can stand
in a certain way you can feel that weave
and when you feel that weave strongly
that chronic sense of tightness of the
self
relaxes and the wind blows through the
trees and the leaves dance is just
waking up waking up to something that
has always been there it didn't start it
doesn't stop you don't make it happen
it's just the natural condition of
being the bubble
pops shunyata right emptiness emptiness
of self but the translation of shunyata
that I like the best is transparency
transparency it's like I'm
here but everyone's here but we become
transparent to the ground condition we
become transparent to the true condition
of
things people wake up in all sorts of
circumstances and all sorts of
activities with all sorts of
context and one outside of my own
psychedelic work one of of the places
where I've experienced this simple
simple
truth very deeply is in the
classroom you know when something uses
my mind or uses me and there is this
wind that blows invisibly between the
students and myself or between us
together and that and that delicious
feeling of being used where you just
kind of relax and something happens
which is bigger than you
oh there's no self here there's no self
in in it this is something which is
inherently trans self phenomena and when
you when you just appreciate the trans
self nature of this
exchange the joy of discovering that the
life that is alive in you the life
that's moving in this room is actually
the life of all
things it is the life of all things your
life and their life your
life it's the life of all things
relaxing into
that even when we forget even when I
forget life doesn't forget life is still
one the transparency is still there
whether or not I'm remembering it or not
whether I'm a paying pay attention to or
not it's always there it's just there
waking up you can wake up in any
circumstance in any condition and it's
lovely to wake up when you're working as
a in the classroom it's just why
not the circle of
learning I had had the experience many
times I'm sure you have two you go
through an exercise you go through an
experience you read a book you learn
something very quickly a few days later
a week later somebody asked you a
question in class if they had asked you
two weeks before you wouldn't have
anything to say because you don't didn't
know that but because they asked you now
you have something to say and you you
give it to them and they it's important
to them and you think wow Isn't that
cool something is alive in the universe
it's able to use something that I
learned in order to help somebody
somebody else that is just got to be
damn cool that's
neat uh but then I began to realize yeah
you know I don't quite I haven't seen
this all work out yet it's much more
comp complicated than that it's not
simply that something that I learned is
being used by the universe to facilitate
a learning in somebody else it's
actually often the reason I learned this
in the first place the reason I had this
experience in the first place is because
there was a a need to know coming at
me and my system picked up the need to
know and I had the ability to learn so
that when this happened when this need
came forward The Exchange took place the
circle of
learning and when I began to realize it
that this was happening all the time it
was all it had been happening for
decades before I even understood
it that's when you really have to let go
big time because you don't even own your
career you don't even
own your own academic ideas your own
academic passions your passion and your
students passion are intertwined right
from the very beginning and that's when
you either clutch and get real tight on
it and try to get back in control of it
or you let go very very deeply and you
begin to just
this the beginnings and endings of your
life do not start and stop with you the
reason you want the things you want the
reasons you love the things you love the
reasons that you just have the hungers
that you have are not independent of the
loves and hungers and the wishes that
other people people have we're just
constantly processing these things at
multiple levels all at the same
time now that's a dance isn't that it's
just a
dance
well I kept doing the Psychedelic work I
kept going deeper and deeper I began to
get into you know things I haven't
written about publicly yet you know dark
night early Dawn takes the first 10
years but there's a second 10
years deep stuff stuff that many of you
have touched and worked
in to experience
reincarnation not as an in not at the
soul level not at the individual level
but at the aggregate level to experience
what it's like to be an speci
that's
reincarnating so that every individual
is like sloughing cells off of skin this
massive magnificent beautiful organism
learning the learning of the species
mind Generation by generation billions
of
people beginning to be drawn into the
larger story of Humanity's evolutionary
pivot it going into vast tracks of
time being drawn into the crisis as
fermenting underneath history bringing
us into this boiling point going beyond
the boiling point to see what's what's
being
generated what has been being in the
works for 100,000 years
from and this Crescendo that we're
moving to in some ways
can you imagine what it would be like to
go through pregnancy and labor and not
know what a what a child was in some
ways what we're going through only
really for me began to make sense when I
began to get a a taste of the human
that's coming the human that we're all
in the process of gestating through
history and then to be enter into some
of the domains that I've called the the
domain of diamond Luminosity or that the
Buddhists call it Samba kayas best as I
can determine this deep deep intimacies
with the
Divine intimacies so deep they
eventually become became for me too
painful to leave just too painful I
couldn't keep going back into
them I could not share this knowledge
with my students
I didn't talk about my work but I was
always teaching stand stuff so there was
a sense in which I could could teach
through
Stan but eventually my work reached and
tapped into territory I could
not bring that to
them even though they were willing they
just didn't have sufficient preparation
they were undergraduate students in Ohio
they were not graduate students in
California you I could not bring that to
them them and something began to happen
inside my body because my natural being
is to
share but I could not share these things
that meant so deep to me I had knowledge
that I could not bring forward I had to
stop myself from bringing it
Forward I began to lose control of my
voice I I began to there was so much
tension in my voice because someone
would ask a question and inside me there
would come this
knowing that would naturally want to
reach out and share
but I couldn't so I'd clutch and i' I'd
lose control of my voice and there'd be
kind of a bark it's kind of embarrassing
it's kind of a
bark and I'd
stop it was getting pretty intense this
was when my work was really getting to
the peak stages in 97 98 99 I stopped it
in
99 I really didn't know how to where
this was going to go
and then a number of things happened in
my personal
life uh my marriage
ended uh dark night early Dawn was
published and then I was given an
opportunity to come to be the director
of education at
ions and uh so I thought okay took care
of my family I mean the worst experience
of my life was going through that
divorce taking care of my former wife
taking care of my children moving them
getting everything
situated working that beginning of that
healing process but then I went to
California and I thought ah this will be
the new platform this will give me I I'm
out of Ohio I'm out of teaching
undergraduates I'm going to be able to
work with
more people who are already through
Class A B and C we can start at D you
know this is going to be a new platform
for
me and it it was kind of initially but 2
years
later it didn't work out for a variety
of reasons don't need to go
into really did not want to stay there
and I came back to Ohio and I resumed my
teaching
career which is a hard transition to go
through I knew I didn't belong at YSU
anymore in Youngstown anymore but this
is where I had to be because I had to
get my kids through college I I had TW
college tuitions to go I really couldn't
step away until my youngest graduated
from college and that was still a number
of years off so I kind of you know
adjusted I had stopped the intense
psychedelic work I my system was
beginning to slow down but I knew that
something wasn't right I mean I was
really ungrounded I was really
I had developed an over attachment to
marijuana you know I I just I began to
realize part of me just was not willing
to come down off the mountain and my
smoking was keeping me from coming all
the way down all the way down off the
mountain and I realized I had to come
completely down off the
mountain and that took that took some
time
it took 5 to 10 years after I stopped my
work before my whole system kind of
re-calibrated down to the new
Baseline soon as my daughter graduated
from college I resigned from
YSU and then the question becomes how do
not how do I share what I know now and
so I it's by writing you know it's by
writing and wonderful opportunity to
spend some time with you I mean it's
just what you are such a blessing to me
really such a blessing your hearts and
your minds are so beautiful a
damn how do I contribute to the
Resurgence the renewal of the
Psychedelic Renaissance how do I
personally contribute to my discipline
how do I help them realize the potential
of psychedelics for Philosophy for my
original discipline how do I bring that
forward how can I help others tap into
the cosmology The cosmological Depths
that they are already deeply part of
without exposing themselves to some of
the risk and making some of the mistakes
that I made along the
way knowing when to pull back knowing
when when to stop knowing when the
students whom you love and I love being
with the students I love being in the
classroom but knowing when those are not
my students anymore I can't keep doing
this pulling
back and then writing you know writing
and then seeing what happens seeing what
comes from
there so the book now I'm working on is
stealing diamonds from Heaven which is
this whole story and then I have another
one I want to work on called the birth
of the diamond Soul which is really
about my sense of what's happening in
history and
nature okay not bad 9:00 right on pretty
damn good
huh okay I'm done let's stand
up unkink your ankles and your knees
okay well let here here for Chris
[Applause]
anybody going to say nobody's I'll say
something okay go I think you can see
why I was so delighted and uh to write
the forward to Christ's book and how
easy it was to tell you the truth so
thank you and for those any of you who
are interested in continuing this
conversation with Chris or with me with
various parts of what what you're doing
and it's important to see us um I would
be happy to participate maybe even while
we're here we could figure that out okay
that's
good okay that's
possible pull up a cushion okay um I I
don't know if any of you going to be
leaving I have a this is really be
breaking the mood wouldn't it save it
for later we save it for later okay I do
have an announcement for later but let's
save it till the discussion okay okay
anybody who wants to leave at any time
yeah please do yeah but um I mean I'm
very moved by Chris as you could tell um
and if you read the forward you'll see
that it was it was an easy affirmation
to make now what most of you don't know
is that I was Robert sitter in a
holotropic breath work session right
down at the big house when we and he was
my sitter
we got down
together okay floor is open let's
talk okay um so yeah maybe I'll begin
with a little explanation why I jumped
up here oh good
um so you said you did young child for
30 years and 33 33 yeah well I I had a
very similar experience for 20 years at
Peru College yeah where I taught all my
my students were first generation yeah
um I taught four I never had fewer than
40 students I never taught the same
student twice I taught 40 students three
times a year three times a day MH uh
each semester for 20 years yeah so it's
a little something then I come to
Paradise um not as a faculty member
initially but I've now been a fac fa
member for 14 years mhm all the time
looking for the kind of experience that
you
described and either I well I I I'm the
brick that you said you were uh but so I
didn't have all those things I also
didn't have a whole psychedelic uh
practice we can fix that
we there's no shortage of people in this
room or prepared at a moment's
notice to get me on their
team that said I want to say that in
this
psychedelically uh inspired Community
neither has it ever happened that a
person pressured
me not once yeah that's the way it's
supposed to be of course it is but it
isn't always in life but it it is the
case
okay so um so I'm always looking for the
kind of what I call the etheric body
yeah to be experienced and shared with
language and examples and whatever and
I'm not saying it doesn't happen or it
hasn't happened it certainly has not
happened at the level that you described
in the in the uh living classroom which
I think is quite an amazing document if
you haven't read it it's an amazing
document um so I just wanted to take I
jumped up here very spontaneously or you
you field uh go up uh to right um to
uh I actually had a pretty hard trip if
you remember yeah in fact everybody was
out of the room I don't know why I'm
talking about this everybody was out of
the room and uh Stan relieved you yeah
and when I came out of this experience I
assisted to assisted to Chris that was
about 10 minutes uh it was actually 3
hours and uh there was a hand that I
recall experiencing something like a
basball glove mhm which was Stan's hand
on my face that went from here all the
way
up and this giant of a mountain of a man
with exquisite gentle comp comp
passionate quality yeah right uh I
almost I was you know I had this
opportunity to talk at at the conference
I almost said that but I said no it's
not really what it's about but it's in
my mind because we just had this great
experience of of Chris of sorry Stan so
anyway we had that together I for you
that's right so it's a very bonding
experience to have have this um the
other time I did it was in uh my house
and uh Ashbury Street uh with will
keeping well he's good you're in great
hands yeah I know I stopped I went to
the mountain twice yeah uh but anyway
getting back to you and your work and
your relationship to our students which
is quite intense considering that you
don't teach that often yeah right it's
quite intense I hear yeah get him here
keep him here that kind of thing uh
which I listen to and remember and try
to be you know do what we can um but
keep keep it up keep it up
uh let me mention something about the
etheric field this comes at the very end
of the living classroom because the
living classroom was written in
published in 2008 written in 2006 7 and
I stopped the heavy duty psychedelic
work in
99 over time this energetic residence
calmed down it didn't go away entirely
but instead of kind of kind of being
like a lightning rod where it was
happening around me without my being you
know now I had to kind of cooperate with
it I had to kind of let it happen not
like I could control it but there was a
sense of it's a it was a subtler thing
and that kind of teaches us something
about the etheric level that the
practice empowers the the system you
open up you bringing in heavy duty
energy you move from 110 volts to 240
volts naturally you're going to act
activate these inherent
circuits but then if you if the system
calms down it's not like the circuits
the network is there but you're not
there's not as much energy driving it
and
that's there's a wisdom in the kind of
the pace of evolution there is a
certain not a risk I think I mean
potentially but there is a certain if
you over if you drive the system hard
things are going to happen then you calm
down things calm down you know so I
don't have that transparency today that
I did at the peak in the living
classroom and now it's kind of a subtler
thing than it was
then add something
yeah I don't really talk about
um rules are rules rules are rules um
you know the period of the greatest
transparency as you described it was
that whole period of the Uranus Neptune
conjunction which was indeed a field a
collective field that did exactly that
uh you know dissolving of boundaries the
creation of transparent Fields it's a
per perfect expression of it in a very
creative way and it was you know it
basically um you know started coming in
in the mid to late ' 80s and then was
just totally cooking all through the 9s
and then um you know once it got to 2001
it reached the 15 Dee Mark and and you
know that pulse that you know PCC was
born under and uh many other I mean now
we've got the Uranus Pluto and a whole
another kind of driving intensity is
here uh but what you were describing of
the living classroom and the morphic
field that was Tak in and these these
fields these coarse fields these class
Fields Etc um it's a it's larer both the
perception and the capacity to uh
cultivate it and the capacity to name it
and articulate it very much I think is
an expression of that that larger uh
Uranus Neptune um very the privilege
that we all had come to to have had that
going all all during those years yeah
yeah thank
you so where are we going Chris um
Richard Chris I um I just want to
express my deepest gratitude um for some
of us that have experienced your in a
classroom and see the living embodiment
of your written word in person it is
unbelievable to be in the presence and I
feel every time I leave the classroom I
feel um just a little bit more dignified
and um connect to a larger purpose in
life and um on a personal note like five
or six weeks ago I started teaching
poetry to sixth and seventh graders and
I was terrified in front of those kids
um I felt like I didn't even know how to
speak to kids and um if it wasn't for um
for your book I think I would have
fallen apart because I I had this
distinct feeling um with the help of
your book that not all responsibility
laid on my my shoulders and I could
actually
just allow the field to um create the
class and sure enough it happened and I
saw it in In Living Action yeah so I do
I do have a question that I want to add
to this little um note and that is what
what cosmological implications do you
see um from the field experience that
you have made in your life that the
whole universe seems to relate and that
potential to create Fields everywhere we
look yeah um as a Galaxy a kind of field
like that and
um any thoughts well the nice thing
about it is it was working just fine for
hund it's been working this way for
billions of years before we began to
understand what was going on so whatever
is going on it's been going on for a
hell of a long time the fact that we're
beginning to understand some of these
Dynamics and maybe can participate in
them more
consciously some people actually some of
my colleagues have said you know well
this is kind of like uh it undermines
your individuality you know you all this
kind of ego fear kind of stuff but it's
like look we're just beginning to play
with something that's been playing with
us for a long time so I don't know I
don't know how it all works you know I
don't know the full ramifications of all
these Dynamics it's just that look when
we just kind of work together we
synchronize ourselves we work with
guided intention we want focused
intention we do these exercis together
what do you know there's a little bit of
bleed through that comes together a
little reinforcement that takes place
hey then it get scary you think about
well there's a field around the
Pentagon there's a field around shopping
malls there's a field around the New
York Times there's a field around all
you know there's so fields are
everywhere there's they're not good or
bad they're they not moral just moral
things there's negative there's a field
around the cluc clux clan there's a
field around the NRA and all the
chapters of the NRA but it's been going
on for a long time it's just the
connective tissue of Consciousness man
reaching sort of threshold
proportion it but once you understand
that then you kind of begin to be a
little bit more sensitive to your own
psychic
hygiene you don't want to put yourself
in certain psychic Fields because yeah
yeah you know I was like I used to take
my kids to karate
matches and oh man it's like it's like
you know it's just kind of you know but
going to an art museums that's kind of a
nice field you know so
it's why did you say as I think you did
that uh they're not good or bad but you
just you just indicated that some Fields
really are pretty negative and
difficult by good good or bad I mean
nature isn't making is doesn't seem to
be at least I don't think of nature as
rein is in this particular respect
reinforcing morally good feels and
undermining morally injurious feels or
negative feels now I as an evolving
Consciousness want I choose to cultivate
certain energy in my life and by
choosing if I want to cultivate that
energy then I kind of want to detach
from this energy so I may make moral
distinctions and I may want to associate
myself with fields of compassion
intelligence creativity and and not put
myself in in the context of intense
competition you know corrosive vitriolic
feels
but it's kind of like you know the oan
has currents the ocean has rip tides the
ocean moves one way or the other it we
drown or we
float but they're not
moral so we have um
two differences in our worldview okay
that I've surfaced in the last few
minutes okay you might be interested uh
one is for
me uh this entire discussion takes place
in a uh comprehensive evolution of
Consciousness yes if we since we all we
all here mostly all here for Rick's talk
just remember what he was saying about
the uniqueness of the modern Western
Consciousness well that uh what that
fact uh that Rick is so good at
articulating but he and I both
influenced by own bfield saving the
appearances and many books like that MH
uh
uh leads me to say that to you for your
comment that
um something like the
etheric uh
was uh
immediately uh
evident uh without the separation came
about in the modern West and so now we
are in a situation where we have to
learn I think by love
to
reconnect with our our etheric and the
etheric that surrounds us in a way that
we we do try to discern
aetheric
fields which may be synonymous tological
okay that are working against love and
we have to know that they are and do
what we can to transform
them I'll go even further than that I
agree with you great I think I think the
universe you know Jung said the universe
tilts towards growth right right so I
think there are ways and levels of the
universe that's actually encouraging the
forces of
compassion and tilting it towards
growth but when can I say that the feels
themselves are natural phenomena that
are not in themselves good or bad they
just are that doesn't mean that there
aren't other dynamics that are at play
which are encouraging the emergence or
strengthening in subtle ways perhaps
feels of compassion which are feels of
Oneness which are feels of growth and
kind of uh not giving as much support to
feels which are inherently divisive and
inherently destructive of the unified
fabric of
life I think
I I think I would want to revise your
language just a little bit okay uh
because I'm not I don't often talk about
anything inherently without adding its
Rel its multiple relationships yes so I
don't think that fields are uh negative
all by themselves they're negative in
relation to something that the universe
needs to
accomplish that's interesting language I
have to sit with that for a bit uh okay
let me sit with that for a bit I like
that in relationship that they have to
accomplish okay let me sit with that for
a bit I mean young to tends towards
growth or siner talks about uh the
universe is trying to evolve towards
love and freedom yeah I actually think
it's towards love and freedom is only
the shouldn't say only is the uh
condition which makes makes love
possible yeah to me love is is an
expression of the inherent Oneness of
life and it is it is it Fosters it it
expresses it and that's why it's so
powerful it's it is the experience of
the inherent unified nature of reality
you know yeah and therefore those fields
that are
emphasizing and militating on behalf of
disunity
and fear hatred and
delusion uh I consider to be negative
and to
be um and that it's part of my life to
try to transform those fields which uh I
also Advance against what I think of
myself yeah I I certainly agree with you
on that I mean you know I just a little
side note Youngstown one of the reasons
I learned that I was in Youngstown
particularly short very quick
bullet my it was my soul's choice to do
the work with the ocean of suffering
that I ended up doing for all those
years in the Psychedelic
work San Francisco is not a very good
environment in which to deal with those
kind of negative feels Youngstown is a
very very good environment to to deal
with those kind of negative feels
Youngstown has made the the cover of
Time Magazine twice as Mobtown USA had
the highest murder per capita rate in
the country for a number of years and it
goes the mafia dominated Youngstown
politics for many years lots of Gangland
executions and it goes all the way back
to the Native Americans where some
terrible massacres took place there so
there's a field a huge kind of psychic
field a lot of Eastern European
immigration a lot of patriarchy a lot of
abusive women it's really kind of it's
it's a place where Bad Karma comes to
work itself out uh and so I I believe in
working
to lift those feels lift those energies
out of the collective psyche and I you
know so I I affirm that very very
deeply but when I so when I say that the
fields themselves I
mean the aggregation of that negativity
is a natural phenomenon that I don't
mean it's a I don't mean to affirm it as
a natural therefore good it's it's an
aggregation of energy which is
natural how about
intelligible intelligible
okay Wendy wants to get in I'm sorry go
s me how' you like a job oh yeah I've
taken it already good it be the Somers
saw from now on
[Laughter]
yeah oh thank you Chris for coming and
sharing with us it was beautiful to see
you speak so freely and um express
everything you want to express and and
articulate it very well thank you my
question my curiosity in working with
Fields is um comes with the idea
of I I I think about the the form of an
atom and how the electron jumps from
ring to ring um with no time taken yeah
and and with that idea as a kind of a
model for how the universe is structured
yeah I was curious to hear what you
would have to say
about conscious the evolution of
Consciousness in a relational field and
Quantum leaps in that
field I don't
know I mean we know about emergence we
we know that you know things happen
things
jump uh we hit tipping points we think
we're coming to a Tipping Point an
evolutionary Tipping
Point
uh when people have near-death
experiences they go through these
exponential increases in Awareness in a
very short period of time and more than
one author is suggested that the human
race is coming to a collective
near-death experience a potential
jumping point
uh if Fields come to tipping points in
small groups you know my in dark night
early Dawn I I suggest that we have a
long way to go and very little time to
get there and I suggest that the only
way we could possibly make it as far
evolutionary wise is we have to go is if
we understand field Dynamics because
from field Dynamics we're not trying to
change 7 billion Minds we're only trying
to change one
mind and the 7 billion experiences are
being processed at an integral level and
so uh if we understand nonlinear systems
and if we hypothesize that the human
Collective unconscious is a system and
it can be thrown into non-linear
Dynamics are far from equilibrium
conditions perhaps nonlinear conditions
can emerge and Brian helped me out here
but you know when a system goes into
Beyond far or far from equilibrium
conditions things happen fast and things
can jump and I
really think that some Dynamic like that
is underlies the potential that human
beings have to make a Quantum step
change it's not simply an aggregate of a
lot of individuals but there is a kind
of a deeper summation coming forward in
all those individuals is
that following on Brian again okay I'll
let other people talk but I I'll
remember what I was thinking s your job
yeah
sorry
you thank you yeah I I was just saying
Samy that it' be really cool if if you
somersaulted and I I could tell you
didn't understand me I felt so bad I
thought he thinks I didn't like his
sumers salty I loved it it was fantastic
no no I could tell that you did good
okay great great so I actually didn't
want the microphone yeah but but Robert
does and so here we
are Jesse's all the way back and didn't
go first I just who Aaron Lydia
Lydia
thanks um I have a question about
working with fields yeah
um I have two questions but they might
have this a Sim very similar answer okay
um one is that I could see how working
with Fields goes can be almost
applicable in kind of any relational
situation yes um so I'm I'm inquiring if
you could share something specific about
a
practice um in working with fields and I
guess my second question is about a lot
of us do work in relationship to being
aware of the crisis that's happening in
the world and um the level of
Destruction and Chaos that a lot of
people are experiencing and
um I guess whether it's a a person we're
trying to sort through something with or
or being present with and wanting to be
strong and and good and and
used um in the face of also knowing that
we're going to live our lives being very
aware and maybe really close to levels
of um destruction that are scary and um
and and processing and being with lots
of fear and and anger and delusion so do
you have um yeah specific practice that
you'd like to share or does that would
make you think of that we something for
us to maybe digest on
compassion practices that's what comes
to mind first of all you're already
doing what you're describing you're
already doing
it you each one of you has made a
choice to radically insert yourself into
an evolutionary process to bring about a
fundamental shift and an improvement in
the condition of the
planet you you've really you've traveled
across the country you've aligned
yourself with a very very distinctive
institution and many of you are just
like following pure gut instinct
somewhere that you can't see because
it's not a traditional
track you're already doing it you're
already plugged into to the Dynamics
that are building pressure-wise you're
already taking in massive quantities of
information you're already watching
a cooking taking place you're already
reaching for becoming the embodiment of
the
solution so everything you're doing
you're that you're talking about you're
already
doing so how can you do
that better is what you're really asking
just a little bit just a little bit
better and and I think it's really
important to take care of
yourself because there's a lot of wear
and tear and burnout cuz this is not
over this is not going to be fixed soon
this is you're going to die and still be
in process your children will die and
will still be in process so it's it's a
long it's a marathon type of
thing how do you keep yourself
perpetually replenished in a long term
like that how do you how do you kind of
stay attuned to the opportunities and
there's several things that come to mind
but I guess the one that comes most
deeply are compassion practices and
every tradition has compassion practices
where whether it's uh exchanging self
for other or some type of practice where
you just voluntarily expand your
heart into Deep Beauty into deep pain
into broad horizons and just hold that
and and then bring it back down again
and
then take up your individual day
work if every tradition has practices
like that because
compassion is the is the recognition of
the inherent Oneness of life and so if
we're talking about a revitalized
contact between the individual the the
highly refined highly evolved
historically beautiful individuality but
reconnecting into the larger context of
the larger field of
Life uh
compassion is that expression of that
celebration of that Oneness it's it's
encouraging that
Oneness there is Clarity practices if
you need
Clarity they're Clarity practices there
are all sorts of different they're
antidote practices but compassion
practices seem to me to really most
deeply address what you're what you're
talking
about thanks
mhm s
good very helpful thank you so much for
this Chris yeah thank you
um so my
question is about coming down off the
mountain uh I was really struck by that
part and I'm curious if you could speak
a little bit more towards it
both your decision I mean you had your
own own natural waves and evolution in
terms of your use with sacred medicine
yeah and then also um something I
personally wrested with was an over
attachment to marijuana and I also felt
like it was really for many years in a
very beautiful way keeping me connected
to the mountain MH to the numinous to
the archetypal realm M and I had to find
and am still finding my own relationship
to it in order to live my truth in this
world in the way that I want to and how
I want to bring do my work mhm and it's
very alive and for me and also for a lot
of my friends in different
communities yeah so I'm just curious if
you could you know speak a little more
to that and also something around the
intimacy with the Divine and how you
feel you said that the veil or something
shifted slowed down or calmed down yeah
and I'm wondering where you are with
that now yeah and why it's felt
important for you to move in that
direction at this
point thank you the very heartfelt
question that you're asking I'll do my
best to speak to the same depth from
which it
comes I'm
Neptune first house Square sun in the
10th
house addiction is the shadow of of
Neptune right and Neptune is what allows
me to open up into deep Fields with kind
of Rel relatively ease but the the
Shadow and it and it's what gives me
kind of a sensitivity to Collective
Dynamics but the downside is it you know
there the shadow side of it is taking
the the lower form of of unity rather
than the higher form of unity and that's
been an issue for me addiction that not
alcohol this but marijuana has been an
issue for me that I really had to learn
and grow it and and know when to Let It
Go
I stopped the high dose work for two
reasons one
because uh I was running into a lot of
physical and subtle Energy System
complications and I kept thinking that
these complications would stop if I kind
of went through another enough dying
experiences and then eventually I
realized no they were actually happening
because I had gone through so many dying
experiences and they were only going to
get worse if I kept on plunging myself
into these huge fires and I I I just I
had to let the system
and I was doing a lot of purification
practice I was doing a lot of yoga I was
doing a lot
of Tibetan deity practices so I was
really getting a lot of support but I
was still running so much
energy that I just my body was telling
me you just got to let that energy calm
down you've got to let it soothe
out but the main on top of that there
was another reason and and so there's a
cautionary note I'm saying you know you
all know I speak deeply and positively
about psychedelics but it's a tricky
path and even when you do it really well
and I tried to do it really carefully
and really
well it's still
tricky and the main reason I stopped is
because I literally I just could not
take coming back
anymore the the intimacy with the divine
the places that I eventually learned how
to move into were so beautiful and so
extraordinary and so
home and so
light that coming back was so
painful now there are beings who can
live in those places I know they are I
read them you know all honor to the
Great
mahasa I'm not one of those beings who
can sustain that yet and going in and
out of that condition and we're not
talking about Enlightenment this is
something different this is kind of more
like the mahasa something that in that
lineage coming back out of it was just
becoming too painful
and
eventually I asked the universe never to
bring me back into to this reality until
I wouldn't have to
leave I couldn't take it anymore I
learned that it's possible to have too
much
God and that's not I didn't even you
know but it is you can just take
on more than is healthy to if you're
going to stay with your feet on the
earth you can open
yourself too deeply for
it when I sto that deep
work I went into a sadness that was just
excruciating because I knew when I left
I was never in my lifetime I would never
be able to go back into that territory
again because it takes it's like Olympic
Training you can't get I can't get back
to it by dropping a huge amount of acid
today I would take years of work to be
able to get back into this territory
it's a momentum thing I knew I was
leaving this
forever until I died and I believe when
I
die I'm there I you know the universe
would not be so cruel to not allow me to
go back and if I can get to
there it's an even
deal coming back
down marijuana allowed me to not to S to
not
because of all this work when I would
smoke I would open up pretty big none of
the intermediate kind of stuff it was
just like open up to the
sun and it it was a way of not getting
really back down with my feet completely
on the ground it it was
just and it was a a deepening of my
commitment to the
mother to give up this particular
because marijuana is a tricky thing it's
a mild psychedelic but it's also a
euphoric right and so it gets that
little positive glow you know and and if
you're if you're receptive to it and
comfortable with it
it's but it was keeping me literally off
the ground it was keeping me just a
little off and
uh I began to realize that I couldn't
finish my life's work in that condition
that was just not good enough I had to
get all the way down into the ground I
had to get all the way down in my
body so I I continue to do practice I
you know I
do vajana practice I do Zin practice I I
do my thing and I re I take teachings
and I I sit with the beings who you know
can give the teachings
but the diamond Luminosity domain is
it's not the same as the the state of
transparency the state of shunyata it's
a it's a different reality there are
beings who can live there I know there
are I'm just not one of them
yet
okay thank you
thanks Chris um I have two
questions one um I'd love to hear more
about the human that we're moving
towards as a species or as you know um
and the diamond soul and um and also I'm
I'm just curious about you mentioned
uh the moment that you reach when your
students are no longer your students and
that doesn't seem to happen here yeah uh
and so I'm curious uh what how we might
relate to that in a place where we are
always invited back in um as
continuing uh the learning fields and I
don't know whether we're not closing the
fields or whether we're closing them in
certain ways but leaving Parts open or
what how that's working but yeah okay
that's an interesting question
I think your own your your I'm okay your
full-time faculty probably have a better
answer to that than I'm going to
suggest but I don't what I'm seeing is
not a failure to close the field that
doesn't mean maybe we could close the
fields better but you
know from what I see from a distance and
what I've seen from Christina who was
the program coordinator for a while and
she used to write these poems for
graduation graduation is a tremendous
celebration of accomplishment and you
seem to graduate well you seem to
celebrate accomplishments well you
celebrate your
dissertations well and you celebrate
your Master's thesis well uh it seems to
me that you you do have closure built
into your community you honor your
graduates and bringing graduates back
in doesn't mean that the fields haven't
been well closed
now if there's any fine-tuning to do
well that's you know but I don't think
just having an extended Community
because again you're you're an unusual
community mean really you see much more
than most people see no wonder you'd get
lonely out there you know there's not
too many people who see what you see and
there not too many people who are
willing to put on their lives on the
line the way you have put your lives on
the line so naturally what would be more
natural than to have a
community that nourishes itself through
your various levels of re-entering the
world kind of you know and engaging
it's
yeah I think that's extremely good
answer Chris and thanks for the question
great question
um the way the way I tend to think about
us us PCC faculty and students and
alumni um it's not so much in terms of
field so it's helpful it's a good
concept
um I think of it much more in terms of
individual and somewhat
temporary karmic Jo joining of
Will and mind and
affect and for some people that joining
has great
longevity and for some people it
doesn't and that seems to me um
perfectly
fine that some people really come into
to this community with heart and mind
and will in a way that is
transformative of for those persons and
for the
community and other people are in more
lightly and thereafter are held in a way
that's
proportionate to that
commitment and so some of our alums in a
certain sense haven't left the community
no matter where they
are and
others I think I want to say will hardly
here there is that huge range that seems
to me right it's perfectly fine for each
person to be as in in many different
ways as he or she wishes for that time
in their life given their
karmic task and
opportunity and so I don't think of a
single field I
think uh it's
a
um it's a
community of many
levels and some of us are trying to
operate on all the levels and some of us
are doing a just have other commitments
and um it will be influential in some
respect and not others and not all and
for some people no it's really
major comprehensively
transformative and I think we sort of
know who we are the way we talk to each
other and um so when when Chris comes in
with his um very profound and
fascinating and to my mind very
mysterious as well as
inspiring uh
biography um it seems to me that he
touches very deep places in our
community
psyche but I don't for a moment think
expect that Chris touches all of the
members of our
community many of whom are working on a
different problem
and have different different tasks
different opportunities or are just
blocked from something that Chris could
give
um or they already have moved on to
something else so I'm very
impressed by the when I think of all the
reasons I'm impressed by PCC and uh um
I'm very impressed by our the capacity
of the entire community s to sustain and
encourage very impressive
plurality
variety of ways of
participation and so I for me field is a
little too singular yes it is for who we
are as we just look around we're really
different from each other and it's great
that we can come together as deeply and
as creatively as we do given how
different we are and will continue to be
this is not a psychological
philosophical boot camp this is a place
where you come through and go out and
something very deep or not so deep will
have happened and I hope you have
gratitude and ways of continuing to
participate but the
field I'm not even going to use the word
the the community MH is constantly
evolving thanks to the many entirely
different highly Unique Individuals who
come and
and Stir It Up and lift it up uh to new
possibilities the way I think about it
MH so uh at some point we probably
should and we got 12 minutes
huh okay I'm not in charge I was only
asking how about if I ask you answer
your second question because I suspect
it and maybe that maybe that's a good
place to stop you know I mean the hot
tubs are waiting for you not for us
unfortunately I have a really low level
totally mundane announcement this has
gone
from moment I think about Plato who
wrote The Fabulous Symposium and the
Republic and then he had write the laws
yeah which was three times as long as
the Republic uh and so what I'm about to
say has to do with law has to do and I'm
glad we live in a country of law but
it's also sometimes uh it doesn't have
to be um sometimes sort of a low a low a
minimal level um so you heard the other
night that Rick said we're because we're
in a we're not only here in this culture
but we're part of a larger legal culture
institutional C Etc we have to observe
uh
expectations uh that our institutions
and our whole legal system uh requires
us to observe and so uh there are uh
three groups here there's faculty
including to adjunct faculty uh there
are students and alums we could make
three different suggestions but I I'd
like to suggest that we make two faculty
time and student
time try to remember this faculty time
in the lower tubs is
only 8:15 to 9:15 in the morning and
students therefore and students and L
are not invited in the tubs at that time
on the upper tub which some of you
perhaps don't even know about is
actually a square handicap tub it's not
quite as beautiful but it's sometimes uh
very very quiet um not always uh that
tub there two times when you can't go
one is the same as the others 8:15 to
9:15 in the morning and also 10 to 11:
at night in other words right now uh by
the time you get there you shouldn't go
to the Upp and top you should go to one
of the three is already
there right uh probably did you say Sean
yeah yeah I hope I hope Robert doesn't
change this rule anyway
is it clear and can you remember
it okay than clear and remembered thank
you very much because you don't want to
keep talking about it and we and I'm
really glad you have 23 hours all right
in the low com
enjoyable enjoy your one hour huh enjoy
your one
hour we only one hour
the that's true but Rick half his life
here have we've all been here 25 years
30 years don't worry you're here it's a
special thing for you it's we want you
to have as much as possible we also want
to thank Chris first to his wonderful
well his wonderful work his inspiring
deep profound transformative work his
wonderful writings and for this extra
conversation which I thought was even
more
disclosing so we do thank you and
applaud you
you you are wonderful you're really I
can't tell you how wonderful it is when
I get to come here and spend time with
you and to mix it up with you and to
listen to what you have to say and what
you do really you're just an
extraordinary group group of
people my heart is really deeply touched
can you speak briefly to that about the
question
okay this has been something it's it's
been a a a reoccurring and deepening
theme of my psychedelic work it was went
on for many many years and uh a a big
hunk of it was I put it down in the
chapter in the in dark night early Dawn
on the Great Awakening
chapter but it kept on going after that
and
the in the last three sessions of the SE
I didn't know it was ending but it was
about to end uh the universe gave me
three last installments three last
pieces and one of
them was uh the the Capstone of a series
of installments Around The evolutionary
project and the future
human and it'll be in you know this book
and maybe I'll make this particular
session available to the the PCC group
and I'll I'll give it to Rick or or
Robert and let it go
out it was the most
absolutely profoundly disorienting death
dismember not just just reality ripped
apart I mean really 70 sessions in you
wouldn't think that you could go through
something like this I mean you would
think it would be used up you know but
it was just an absolute ripped down
total shattering of reality in order to
give me one last piece
in order to finish this installment on
what's coming
forward and this is something that's
taking place at the at the Deep level of
the collective psyche this this is you
know we all live our lives and we die
and reborn we die and reborn and we do
it within a certain
cradle and that cradle is the archetype
of the human species that we are at this
point in history and and what's
happening is that cradle is about to
shift the fundamental underlying
structure of the human psyche is about
to shift and so the entire Baseline of
what we're dying and being reborn into
is about to change
when we make this transition and we will
all be there in some way shape or form
we will we will feel it we'll be part of
it it it's going to be multiple
Generations but we will all be part of
it and when it happens and as it happens
and as this Exquisite
creature comes out of our historical
womb and walks the Earth
we will look back on all the
pain from Homo erectus all the terrible
suffering all the things we've done to
each other all the horrendous things
we've done to each other all the
loneliness and all the Terrible Things
We will look back on it and say it was
worth
it it was worth it because this being is
the most Exquisite beautiful being
picture a Humanity with its heart
completely healed of all the wars and of
all the rapes and of all
the just completely whole again in a new
way picture the mind
just radiantly strong not fragmented not
torn apart and no conflict within the
the psyche no push pull
just completely
transparent on the earth of the earth
green to its roots and yet at the same
time
in Easy communion with the surrounding
intelligence of the
universe heaven on
Earth for such a species as
this it was one of the greatest
blessings of all the work just to be
able to see what history is making what
is in the process of
emerging and uh and the sessions told me
you have to start writing more about the
future human because when it it gets
dark and we're going into the darkness
if you don't have a vision of what's
coming if you don't understand what's
being birthed by the pain it's you're
going to get lost in the pain the humans
will get lost and that'll but if you
have a
vision a a g and you all know you all
have the intuition you were you had it
before you were born you took it into
this Incarnation you feel
it and it's important to hold on to that
it's important to really really deeply
in your bones know that everything that
you're investing in you are working with
the universe to bring this
forward and it will come forward it's
taking us right up to the edge of
Extinction really the old has to die
in order to give birth to This
Magnificent
creature this is this is a a you know a
species of Buddhas a species of christs
a species of
prophets this is when the feminine is
completely healed and reconciled with
the masculine giving complete
unprecedented access to the
blessings of cosmic
intelligence and it is absolutely
embodied no up and out cosmologies no
Escapist
theologies anymore and no
BTO the BTO is in the process of
emptying itself in this process the BTO
is a fragment of is a condition of a
temporary condition in the evolution
Saga we are in the process by becoming
more integrated we are in the process of
emptying the
BAU this species will not need that type
of
buffer
right this is what we're working this is
one person's
poor
grasp at what we are working for but I
think we all feel it we know it and me
this is not this is just a piece of one
person seeing
something what it is is much bigger than
any one person can
see
yeah thank you thank you
[Applause]